Reframe README around hierarchical alignment and why/what/how (#104)
dyreby/collaboration-framework: README.md

# Collaboration Framework

A framework for encoding how I think, so we can collaborate effectively.

## Why This Exists

Most collaboration friction comes from misaligned assumptions, not different conclusions. When we share a mental model of *what* we're doing, *why* we're doing it, and *how* we'll work together, the work gets lighter.

This framework encodes those assumptions explicitly—not to over-specify, but to align at the right level.

## The Thesis

**Effective collaboration requires alignment at the right level—not more, not less.**

Alignment is hierarchical: *why* → *what* → *how*. And each *how* contains its own why/what/how, all the way down.

At the top sits a shared objective. Below that, agreement on approach. Below that, agreement on implementation. Each level has the same shape: we each say what we think we should do and why, then agree—or surface that we don't.

> **Over-alignment fails.** A mail sorter can't align with the CEO's full context—and shouldn't try. The right level for them is: mail matters, sort it well.

Reviewer: Should find a more modern equivalent for the example? But hopefully one that has as clear a story.

**Under-alignment creates friction.** A sorter who doesn't know *why* mail matters will sort poorly when edge cases appear.

> **The right level is discovered, not prescribed.** Step back to obvious agreement, then step down until you find where the work lives. That's where you align.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The right level is discovered, not prescribed.** Step back to obvious agreement, then step down until we find where the work lives. That's where we align and where the work becomes light.
```

Once aligned on *why*, disagreement on *what* becomes optimization, not conflict. Effort accumulates in the right direction. The *how* is encapsulated—each agent owns their approach within the agreed interface.

Perfect alignment is impossible. The system is designed to iterate and self-correct.

## How It Works

### Concepts

Concepts encode what something means to me—principles, preferences, ways of thinking. They live in [`concepts/`](concepts/) as freeform markdown files.

> What isn't mentioned has no preference. If I say "tree," I mean tree—not secretly hoping for oak. This keeps the vocabulary tractable; I only encode what I'd push back on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What isn't mentioned has no preference. If I say "tree," I mean just tree—not secretly hoping for oak. This keeps the vocabulary tractable; I only encode what I'd push back on.
```
